---
layout: post
title: LinkedIn &#58 Pool of Opportunities.
description: Strategic redesign of LinkedIn's products and services.
keywords: Strategic Information Management, Strategy, Business Analysis, LinkedIn
tags: [Strategy, Business Analysis]
comments: true
---
LinkedIn is a professional network that almost everyone signs up for at some point of time in their lives. The reason could be a search for an internship, a job or just for building up an online presence for better professional opportunities. Having grown to more than 500 million members worldwide (LinkedIn, n.d.) LinkedIn is now at a position where it has unique data about professionals and industries all over the world. It will be interesting to see how LinkedIn uses that data to make fortunes for itself.

### 1. Acquisition by Microsoft: New Directions.

After the acquisition by Microsoft in Dec 2016 (Jeff Weiner, 2016), I think LinkedIn's future plans must undergo a shift from its earlier version of 2012. Although Jeff Weiner mentions in his blog (2016) that LinkedIn will follow its own path, he also suggests many new directions LinkedIn might go with the acquisition by Microsoft. Some of the features we can expect from the acquisition would be LinkedIn's integration with Officer365, Bing Search, and maybe even a business news desk on msn.com.

One of the feature suggested in his blog post is the integration of Microsoft Dynamics and LinkedIn's Sales Navigator which was released last month (Rosencrance L., 2017). It is a sign that the world is changing for better for Microsoft with the investment in LinkedIn. While LinkedIn is proceeding on its path to create the world's first economic graph, it is important to take the context of its acquisition by Microsoft to understand what LinkedIn may have in store for future.

### 2. LinkedIn’s Biggest Problem: Inactive Users

As mentioned in the article by Jeff Bercovici (2016), one of the biggest problems of LinkedIn is its inactive users, as one does not need update LinkedIn more than a couple of times in a year. LinkedIn being too focused on networking and jobs, there is a lower engagement with the platform when individuals are not searching for jobs. LinkedIn started engaging customers more by acquiring Lynda.com and making Learning available for premium users. This might have given a reason to its users to hold on to premium membership for a little more time.

However, I think, LinkedIn needs to do more for engaging people who aren’t in the job-search phase. LinkedIn can benefit from the financial standing of Microsoft and may make some revenue from its services to Microsoft, although even if they would account as an intercompany transfer, this would still give LinkedIn some leeway in pursuing activities that will build up active users for LinkedIn.

### 3. Pool of Opportunities: LinkedIn’s Services

The new direction may cause LinkedIn to modify its existing offerings or create new ones that are attractive to its active and inactive users. For example, below are a few changes LinkedIn can introduce and be benefitted from them.

#### 3.1 LinkedIn Portfolio:
The hiring market is heating up for candidates and recruiters as well. Now a days, candidates don't rely only on resume or references. Candidates create their online portfolios or host projects on their Github accounts. However, treating LinkedIn as an online resume,  there is no way a programmer can import the projects/portfolio in their LinkedIn profile. If LinkedIn introduces a platform for creating online portfolio, it will give its users a reason to stay around and spent some time/efforts on LinkedIn. It also gives employers a reason to spend even more time on LinkedIn. The access to these portfolios can be monetized just the way LinkedIn monetizes access to the professionals outside your connections.

#### 3.2 LinkedIn Pulse:
Influencers are a great way to develop a professional community that LinkedIn strives t develop. However, there is no way of searching for the articles or following topics on LinkedIn. If LinkedIn wants to leverage its influencers, I think it should focus on building platform similar to Medium. Such a platform will result in more blogposts and interactions that are precious for the brands to understand trends and insights into their public perception.

#### 3.3 LinkedIn Slideshare:
LinkedIn Slideshare has remained an isolated island. There is no integration with the LinkedIn network. Letting users embed the slides to their LinkedIn account will also increase engagement, traffic and revenue for Slideshare.

#### 3.4 LinkedIn Jobs:
This is their best feature because of the data that they have. The kind of candidate pool and companies they have on LinkedIn, they are far ahead of any other competitor. There are premiums paid for Inmails and premium insights. However, the recommendation engine keeps suggesting the same jobs again and again. The jobs are recommended even when you have already applied to them. An improvement in the recommendation engine can be based on hybrid approach where it should take in consideration connections as well as profile-contents while recommending jobs.

### 4. Pool of Opportunities: LinkedIn’s Data

Finally, the whole point of increasing engagement with the users is to create a better quality data that LinkedIn can leverage to their advantage. LinkedIn has a great dataset that includes employees, employers, profiles, technologies, businesses, freelancers and etc. And as per their vision of creating an economic graph of the world, it is only right to keep creating more data on their network. The data are used to give insights to candidates and recruiters to help them make better decisions. The data is also being used by Microsoft Dynamics Users to pitch products effectively to the right prospects (Rosencrance L., 2017). In order to gain more advertisements, LinkedIn has also partnered with DataSift for selling more data to advertisers (Wagner K., 2017). This way LinkedIn has already started making money off their data. There could be a few more ways the data can be used to gain more revenue and a competitive advantage as follow.

1. **Providing insights based on LinkedIn data**:  
1.1 Provide trends in financial markets for better investment strategies for investors.  
1.2 Provide insights for Residential and Commercial Real Estate development.  
1.3 Monetizing data for research purpose.

2. **Revenue from services to businesses**:  
2.1 Starting a portal for freelance work for additional data and revenue.   
2.2 Intra-company LinkedIn portals for communication between employees of the same company.   
2.3 Official ways of recording progress, accomplishments and appreciations for employees.  
    This will create data for analytics into head-hunting based on employee performance.  

3. **Opportunities for LinkedIn Learning**:  
3.2 Publish insights on education and skills gaps in industry.  
3.1 Based on skills gaps and provide the educational content on LinkedIn Learning.  

Similarly, there are a number of ways LinkedIn can make use of the opportunities it has. It is only a question of prioritizing the avenues for increasing as well as monetizing the content on LinkedIn's network. LinkedIn’s data is already making a lot of difference for Microsoft. I think if LinkedIn uses the opportunities well, it can sustain its leadership position for a long time to come.

### References:
- Weiner, J. (2016, December 8).LinkedIn + Microsoft: Our Next Play Begins. Retrieved April 22, 2017 from https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/linkedin-microsoft-our-next-play-begins-jeff-weiner
-  Rosencrance, L. (2017, March 21). Microsoft rolls out Sales Navigator Enterprise Edition, with CRM sync, team features. Retrieved April 22, 2017 from https://msdynamicsworld.com/story/microsoft-rolls-out-sales-navigator-enterprise-edition-crm-sync-team-features
- Bercovici, J. (2016, June 13). The heyday of standalone social networking companies may already be in the past. Retrieved April 22, 2017 from https://www.inc.com/jeff-bercovici/microsoft-linkedin-social.html
- Wagner, K. (2017, January 2018). LinkedIn wants more ad dollars, so it’s offering up more user data to advertisers. Retrieved April 22, 2017 from https://www.recode.net/2017/1/18/14308060/linkedin-datasift-partnership-advertising
